FREEDOM FIGHTERS IN INDIA



India gained independence from British rule on August 15, 1947, a significant day that occurred almost 75 years ago. It was the result of a number of movements and conflicts that raged all through the period of British administration, including the famous uprising of 1857. Many revolutionary Indian freedom fighters, including Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru, Chandra Shekhar Azad, Rani Lakshmi Bai of Jhansi, and others, took the initiative in organising the campaign that resulted in India’s independence, which was attained thanks to their efforts. The Indian freedom fighters who gave their lives to guarantee India’s independence are featured on this site.

1. Mahatma Gandhi
The immense sacrifices that Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi made for India earned him the title of “Father of the Nation”; he was born on October 2, 1869. Along with inspiring numerous other independence movements and human rights movements around the world, he not only helped lead India to independence but also played a significant role in its victory. India is recognized for embracing the concept of nonviolence thanks to Gandhi, popularly known as Bapu. He thought that nonviolent resistance and an unwillingness to cooperate with the British would be enough to bring about independence.

2. Subhas Chandra Bose
One of the most successful Indian nationalists in history was Subhash Chandra Bose. He was created in Cuttack on January 23, 1897. He was widely referred to as Netaji. He was a fervent nationalist, and his unwavering patriotism made him a hero. Bose belonged to the radical faction of the Indian independence movement. He served as the head of a radical young wing of Congress from the beginning of the 1920s to the end of 1930. He is believed to have died in an aviation accident on August 18, 1945, although the cause of his passing is still unknown.

3. Bhagat Singh
On September 28, 1907, in Banga, Pakistan, Bhagat Singh was born. He was among the most extreme Indian liberation fighters. In the freedom struggle for India, he was a divisive but respected figure. His involvement in a plot to assassinate James Scott, a British police superintendent, in 1928 as vengeance for Lala Lajpat Rai’s demise was revealed. On March 23, 1931, the British executed this heroic Indian Freedom Fighters by hanging him at Lahore Central Jail in Lahore, Pakistan. He was only 23 years old at the time. He is well known by the name Shaheed Bhagat Singh.

4. Mangal Pandey
Mangal Pandey, a well-known Indian freedom fighter who was born on July 19th, 1827, is frequently seen as the forerunner of India’s first war for independence, the 1857 uprising against the British. As a soldier in the 34th Bengal Native Infantry regiment of the East India Company‘s army, he led the Sepoy rebellion that ultimately resulted in the 1857 uprising. In anticipation of a Sepoy uprising, British officers killed him on April 8, 1857, at Barrackpore, ten days early.

5. Rani Laxmi Bai
On November 19, 1828, the Queen of Jhansi Rani Laxmibai was born in Varanasi. She goes by the stage name Manu and goes by the name Manikarnika Tambe. She was one of the most tenacious soldiers in the Revolutionary War. She inspired numerous Indian women to fight for their country’s freedom, and she still inspires women to defend their rights today. She defended her fortress with her infant child when British troops invaded it in 1858. On June 18, 1858, in Gwalior, she perished in the Battle against a Huge Rose.

6. Jawaharlal Nehru
He joined the 1916 Annie Besant-led Home Rule League movement. He was detained multiple times during the struggle for freedom, and between 1921 and 1945 he spent a total of 9 years behind bars. He was an active member of the United Province’s Non-Cooperation movement and served as its leader. He participated in the salt satyagraha as well. While the Indian National Congress desired dominion status, Jawaharlal Nehru and Subash Chandra Bose believed that the Indian National Congress’s ultimate goal should be complete independence or Poorna Swaraj. On August 15, 1947, he took office as India’s first prime minister.

7. Lala Lajpat Rai
The Punjab Kesari, Lala Lajpat Rai, joined the Indian National Congress. He was one of the founding members of the 1894-founded Punjab National Bank. He established the Dayanand Anglo-Vedic School in Lahore in 1885. The Indian Home Rule League of America was established by him in New York in 1917. He established the Servants of People Society in Lahore in 1921 with the goal of recruiting and educating native missionaries to serve their country. He participated in demonstrations against the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre, the Rowlatt Act, and the Partition of Bengal.

8. Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Lala Lajpat Rai, Bipin Chandra Pal, and Bal Gangadhar Tilak founded the Indian National Congress’ hardline wing. He started the Ganeshotsav and Shivaji Utsav celebrations in 1894. He spread nationalism among the populace through these two celebrations. He started the Ganeshotsav and Shivaji Utsav celebrations in 1894. He spread nationalism among the populace through these two celebrations. Through the two publications he founded, Mahratta (English) and Kesari (Marathi), he promoted the cause of national freedom and educated Indians about their illustrious past and rich cultural legacy. He introduced the Trisutri three-point agenda for national awakening, which stands for Swaraj, Swadeshi, and National Education.

9. Jyotiba Phule
Jyotiba Phule founded India’s first girls’ school in August 1848, and it was located in Tatyasaheb Bhide’s home. Later, he opened two additional schools for girls and people from lower castes (Mahars and Mangs). He was an early supporter of women’s education in India because he thought that only education could alleviate social injustices. He founded the  Satyashodhak Samaj (Society of Truth-Seekers) in 1873 with the intention of enhancing the social rights and political access of the less fortunate segments of society.

10. Dadabhai Naroji
Together with Indians and retired British officers in London, he established the East India Association in 1866. The organisation advocated for Indians under British rule and brought up issues for consideration. Dadabhai Naoroji’s book, Poverty and Un-British rule in India, which exposed the economic exploitation of India by the British, were his most significant contribution. He opposed the 1878 Vernacular Press Act. He supported the inclusion of Indians in the House of Commons and the Indianization of bureaucracy.

List of Women Freedom Fighters in India
India has been home to numerous courageous and inspiring women freedom fighters who played pivotal roles in the country’s struggle for independence from British colonial rule. Here is a list of some prominent women freedom fighters in India. For a complete List of Women Freedom Fighters of India check the given link.

Sarojini Naidu
She was also referred to as the “Nightingale of India” and was a renowned poet, independence warrior, and orator.
In 1925, she was chosen to lead the Indian National Congress.
She advocated for the Quit India Movement and the Khilafat Movement (Indian Disobedience).
Madam Bhikaji Cama
She unfurled the first Indian National Flag in 1907 in Germany at the International Socialist Conference.
Begum Hazrat Mahal
She also went by the name “Begum of Awadh” and was a key player in India’s First Independence War (1857-58).
In the Revolt, she collaborated with Nana Saheb, Tantia Tope, and others.
The Indian government released a stamp in 1984 to honour the Begum Hazrat Mahal.
Aruna Asaf Ali
Aruna participated in open marches during the Salt Satyagraha and was a committed member of the Congress Party.
She was the editor of the Indian National Congress’ monthly publication “In-Qilab.”
She is referred to as the Independence Movement’s Grand Old Lady.
During the Quit India Movement, she is renowned for raising the flag of the Indian National Congress in Bombay.
Annie Besant
She joined the Indian National Congress and was active in political and educational endeavours in India. She was a distinguished Theosophical Society member from Ireland.
She served as the Congress’s first female president.
She founded the Indian Home Rule Movement in 1916.
She founded the “New India” newspaper.
She founded several institutions and schools, such as the Central Hindu College High School in Banaras (1913).
Kasturba Gandhi
She joined with Indigo workers in Champaran, Bihar, in the No Tax Campaign and the Rajkot Satyagraha and was a leader of the Women’s Satyagraha.
Kamala Nehru
Kamala Nehru, Jawaharlal Nehru’s wife, was active in the freedom movement
She helped to organise parades, picket liquor and foreign clothing stores, and organise the United Provinces No Tax Campaign.
Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit
She was the president of the Congress Party and the daughter of Motilal Nehru.
She joined the Non-Cooperation Movement in an effort to challenge British dominance.
She was detained both in 1940 and 1942, both times during the Quit India Movement.
Following India’s independence, she represented it at numerous international conventions.... Read more at: https://www.studyiq.com/articles/freedom-fighters-of-india/
